WHAT THE STATE IS NOT
The State is almost universally consid-
ered an institution of social service.
Some theorists venerate the State
as the apotheosis of society; oth-
ers regard it as an amiable, though
often inefficient, organization for
achieving social ends; but almost all regard it
as a necessary means for achieving the goals of
mankind, a means to be ranged against the “pri-
vate sector” and often winning in this compe-
tition of resources. With the rise of democracy,
the identification of the State with society has
been redoubled, until it is common to hear sen-
timents expressed which violate virtually every
tenet of reason and common sense such as, “we
Originally published in “Egalitarianism as a Revolt Against
Nature and Other Essays” by Murray N. Rothbard (Auburn,
Ala.: Mises Institute, 2000 [1974]), pp. 55–88.
9
10 ANATOMY OF THE S TATE
are the government.” The useful collective term
“we” has enabled an ideological camouflage to
be thrown over the reality of political life. If “we
are the government,” then anything a govern-
ment does to an individual is not only just and
untyrannical but also “voluntary” on the part of
the individual concerned. If the government
has incurred a huge public debt which must
be paid by taxing one group for the benefit of
another, this reality of burden is obscured by
saying that “we owe it to ourselves”; if the gov-
ernment conscripts a man, or throws him into
jail for dissident opinion, then he is “doing it
to himself” and, therefore, nothing untoward
has occurred. Under this reasoning, any Jews
murdered by the Nazi government were not
murdered; instead, they must have “commit-
ted suicide,” since they were the government
(which was democratically chosen), and, there-
fore, anything the government did to them was
voluntary on their part. One would not think
it necessary to belabor this point, and yet the
overwhelming bulk of the people hold this fal-
lacy to a greater or lesser degree.
We must, therefore, emphasize that “we” are
not the government; the government is not “us.”
The government does not in any accurate sense
“represent” the majority of the people.1 But, even
1 We cannot, in this chapter, develop the many problems and
fallacies of “democracy.” Suffice it to say here that an individual’s
if it did, even if 70 percent of the people decided
to murder the remaining 30 percent, this would
still be murder and would not be voluntary sui-
cide on the part of the slaughtered minority.2 No
organicist metaphor, no irrelevant bromide that
“we are all part of one another,” must be permit-
ted to obscure this basic fact.
If, then, the State is not “us,” if it is not “the
human family” getting together to decide mutual
problems, if it is not a lodge meeting or coun-
try club, what is it? Briefly, the State is that orga-
nization in society which attempts to maintain a
monopoly of the use of force and violence in a
given territorial area; in particular, it is the only
organization in society that obtains its revenue
not by voluntary contribution or payment for
services rendered but by coercion. While other
individuals or institutions obtain their income
by production of goods and services and by
the peaceful and voluntary sale of these goods
true agent or “representative” is always subject to that individu-
al’s orders, can be dismissed at any time and cannot act contrary
to the interests or wishes of his principal. Clearly, the “represen-
tative” in a democracy can never fulfill such agency functions,
the only ones consonant with a libertarian society.
2 Social democrats often retort that democracy—majority
choice of rulers—logically implies that the majority must leave
certain freedoms to the minority, for the minority might one
day become the majority. Apart from other flaws, this argu-
ment obviously does not hold where the minority cannot
become the majority, for example, when the minority is of a
different racial or ethnic group from the majority.
ANATOMY OF THE S TATE 11
12 ANATOMY OF THE S TATE
and services to others, the State obtains its rev-
enue by the use of compulsion; that is, by the
use and the threat of the jailhouse and the bayo-
net.3 Having used force and violence to obtain its
revenue, the State generally goes on to regulate
and dictate the other actions of its individual sub-
jects. One would think that simple observation
of all States through history and over the globe
would be proof enough of this assertion; but the
miasma of myth has lain so long over State activ-
ity that elaboration is necessary.

HAT THE STATE IS
Man is born naked into the world,
and needing to use his mind to
learn how to take the resources
given him by nature, and to
transform them (for example,
by investment in “capital”) into
shapes and forms and places where the resources
can be used for the satisfaction of his wants and
the advancement of his standard of living. The
only way by which man can do this is by the use
of his mind and energy to transform resources
(“production”) and to exchange these products
for products created by others. Man has found
that, through the process of voluntary, mutual
exchange, the productivity and hence, the liv-
ing standards of all participants in exchange may
increase enormously. The only “natural” course
for man to survive and to attain wealth, there-
fore, is by using his mind and energy to engage in
the production-and-exchange process. He does
13
this, first, by finding natural resources, and then
by transforming them (by “mixing his labor” with
them, as Locke puts it), to make them his individ-
ual property, and then by exchanging this prop-
erty for the similarly obtained property of others.
The social path dictated by the requirements of
man’s nature, therefore, is the path of “property
rights” and the “free market” of gift or exchange
of such rights. Through this path, men have
learned how to avoid the “jungle” methods of
fighting over scarce resources so that A can only
acquire them at the expense of B and, instead, to
multiply those resources enormously in peaceful
and harmonious production and exchange.
The great German sociologist Franz Oppen-
heimer pointed out that there are two mutu-
ally exclusive ways of acquiring wealth; one, the
above way of production and exchange, he called
the “economic means.” The other way is simpler
in that it does not require productivity; it is the
way of seizure of another’s goods or services by
the use of force and violence. This is the method
of one-sided confiscation, of theft of the prop-
erty of others. This is the method which Oppen-
heimer termed “the political means” to wealth.
It should be clear that the peaceful use of reason
and energy in production is the “natural” path for
man: the means for his survival and prosperity on
this earth. It should be equally clear that the coer-
cive, exploitative means is contrary to natural law;
14 ANATOMY OF THE S TATE
it is parasitic, for instead of adding to production,
it subtracts from it. The “political means” siphons
production off to a parasitic and destructive indi-
vidual or group; and this siphoning not only sub-
tracts from the number producing, but also low-
ers the producer’s incentive to produce beyond
his own subsistence. In the long run, the robber
destroys his own subsistence by dwindling or elim-
inating the source of his own supply. But not only
that; even in the short-run, the predator is acting
contrary to his own true nature as a man.
We are now in a position to answer more fully
the question: what is the State? The State, in the
words of Oppenheimer, is the “organization of the
political means”; it is the systematization of the
predatory process over a given territory.4 For crime,
at best, is sporadic and uncertain; the parasitism is
4 Franz Oppenheimer, The State (New York: Vanguard Press,
1926) pp. 24–27:
There are two fundamentally opposed means whereby
man, requiring sustenance, is impelled to obtain the
necessary means for satisfying his desires. These are
work and robbery, one’s own labor and the forcible
appropriation of the labor of others. . . . I propose in
the following discussion to call one’s own labor and the
equivalent exchange of one’s own labor for the labor
of others, the “economic means” for the satisfaction of
need while the unrequited appropriation of the labor
of others will be called the “political means.”. . . The
State is an organization of the political means. No State,
therefore, can come into being until the economic
means has created a definite number of objects for the
satisfaction of needs, which objects may be taken away
or appropriated by warlike robbery.
ANATOMY OF THE S TATE 15
ephemeral, and the coercive, parasitic lifeline may
be cut off at any time by the resistance of the vic-
tims. The State provides a legal, orderly, system-
atic channel for the predation of private property;
it renders certain, secure, and relatively “peaceful”
the lifeline of the parasitic caste in society.5 Since
production must always precede predation, the
free market is anterior to the State. The State has
never been created by a “social contract”; it has
always been born in conquest and exploitation.
The classic paradigm was a conquering tribe paus-
ing in its time-honored method of looting and mur-
dering a conquered tribe, to realize that the time-
span of plunder would be longer and more secure,
and the situation more pleasant, if the conquered
tribe were allowed to live and produce, with the
conquerors settling among them as rulers exacting
a steady annual tribute.6 One method of the birth
5 Albert Jay Nock wrote vividly that
the State claims and exercises the monopoly of
crime. . . . It forbids private murder, but itself organizes
murder on a colossal scale. It punishes private theft,
but itself lays unscrupulous hands on anything it wants,
whether the property of citizen or of alien.
Nock, On Doing the Right Thing, and Other Essays (New York:
Harper and Bros., 1929), p. 143; quoted in Jack Schwartzman,
“Albert Jay Nock—A Superfluous Man,” Faith and Freedom
(December, 1953): 11.
6 Oppenheimer, The State, p. 15:
What, then, is the State as a sociological concept?
The State, completely in its genesis . . . is a social
institution, forced by a victorious group of men on a
defeated group, with the sole purpose of regulating the
16 ANATOMY OF THE S TATE
ANATOMY OF THE S TATE 17
of a State may be illustrated as follows: in the hills
of southern “Ruritania,” a bandit group manages to
obtain physical control over the territory, and finally
the bandit chieftain proclaims himself “King of the
sovereign and independent government of South
Ruritania”; and, if he and his men have the force to
maintain this rule for a while, lo and behold! a new
State has joined the “family of nations,” and the for-
mer bandit leaders have been transformed into the
lawful nobility of the realm