Human Action
2. T h e Epistemological Problem of a
General Theory of Human Action
In the new science everything seemed to be problematic. It was
a stranger in the traditional system of knowledge; people were per-
plexed and did not know how to classify it and to assign it its proper
place. But on the other hand they were convinced that the incIusion
of economics in the catalogue of knowledge did not require a rear-
rangement or expansion of the total scheme. They considered their
catalogue system complete. If economics did not fit into it, the fault
could only rest with the unsatisfactory treatment that the economists
applied to their problems.
It is a complete misunderstanding of the meaning of the debates
concerning the essence, scope, and logical character of economics to
dismiss them as the scholastic quibbling of pedantic professors. It is
a widespread misconception that while pedants squandered useless
talk about the most appropriate method of procedure, economics
itself, indifferent to these idle disputes, went quietly on its way. In
the Methodenstreit between the Austrian economists and the Prus-
sian Historical School, the self-styled "intellectuaI bodyguard of the
House of Hohenzollern," and in the discussions between the school
of John Bates Clark and American Institutionalism much more was
at stake than the question of what kind of procedure was the most
fruitful one. The real issue was the epistemological foundations of
the science of human action and its logical legitimacy. Starting from
an epistemological system to which praxeological thinking was strange
and from a logic which acknowledged as scientific-besides logic and
mathematics--only the empirical natural sciences and history, many
authors tried to deny the value and usefulness of economic theory.
Historicism aimed at replacing it by economic history; positivisnl
recommended the substitution of an illusory social science which
should adopt the logical structure and pattern of Newtonian mechan-
ics. Both these schools agreed in a radical rejection of all the achieve-
ments of economic thought. It was impossible for the economists to
keep silent in the face of all these attacks.
T h e radicalism of this wholesale condemnation of economics was
very soon surpassed by a still more universal nihilism. From time
immemorial men in thinking, speaking, and acting had taken the uni-
formity and immutability of the logical structure of the human mind
as an unquestionable fact. All scientific inquiry was based on this as-
sumption. In the discussions about the epistemological character of
economics, writers, for the first time in human history, denied this
Introduction 5
proposition too. ~Marxismasserts that a man's thinking is determined
by his class affiliation. Every social class has a logic of its own. The
product of thought cannot be anything else than an "ideological dis-
guise" of the selfish class interests of the thinker. I t is the task of a
"sociology of knowledge" to unmask philosophies and scientific
theories and to expose their "ideological" emptiness. Economics is a
"bourgeois" makeshift, the economists are "sycophants" of capital.
Only the classless society of the socialist utopia will substitute truth
for "ideological" lies.
This polylogism was later taught in various other forms also.
Historicism asserts that the logical structure of human thought and
action is liable to change in the course of historical evolution. Racial
polylogism assigns to each race a logic of its own. Finally there is
irrationalism, contending that reason as such is not fit to elucidate
the irrational forces that determine human behavior.
Such doctrines go far beyond the limits of economics. They ques-
tion not only economics and praxeology but all other human knowl-
edge and human reasoning in general. They refer to mathematics
and physics as well as t o economics. It seems therefore that the task
of refuting them does not fall to any single branch of knowledge but
to epistemology and philosophy. This furnishes apparent justifica-
tion for the attitude of those economists who quietly continue their
studies without bothering about epistemological problems and the
objections raised by poIylogism and irrationalism. The physicist does
not mind if somebody stigmatizes his theories as bourgeois, Western
or Jewish; in the same way the economist should ignore detraction
and slander. H e should let the dogs bark and pay no heed to their
yelping. I t is seemly for him to remember Spinoza's dictum: Sane
sicut lux se ipsam et tenebras manifestat, sic veritas norma sui et falsi
est.
However, the situation is not quite the same with regard to eco-
nomics as it is with mathematics and the natural sciences. Polylogism
and irrationaIism attack praxeology and economics. Although they
formulate their statements in a general way to refer to all branches
of knowledge, it is the sciences of human action that they really have
in view. They say that it is an illusion to believe that scientific re-
search can achieve results valid for people of all eras, races, and social
classes, and they take pleasure in disparaging certain physical and
biological theories as bourgeois or Western. But if the soIution of
practical problems requires the application of tbese stigmatized doc-
trines, they forget their criticism. The technology of Soviet Russia
utilizes without scruple all the results of bourgeois physics, chemistry,
6 Human Action
and biology just as if they were valid for all classes. The Nazi engi-
neers and physicians did not disdain to utilize the theories, discoveries,
and inventions of people of "inferior" races and nations. The be-
havior of people of all races, nations, religions, linguistic groups, and
social classes clearly proves that they do not endorse the doctrines
of polylogism and irrationalism as far as logic, mathematics, and
the natural sciences are concerned.
But it is quite different with praxeology and economics. The main
motive for the development of the doctrines of polylogism, histor-
icism, and irrationalism was to provide a justification for disregarding
the teachings of economics in the determination of economic policies.
The socialists, racists, nationalists, and Ctatists failed in their endeavors
to refute the theories of the economists and to demonstrate the cor-
rectness of their own spurious doctrines. It was precisely this frustra-
tion that prompted them to negate the logical and epistemological
principles upon which all human reasoning both in mundane activities
and in scientific research is founded.
It is not permissible to disposc of these objections merely on the
ground of the political motives which inspired them. N o scientist is
entitled to assume beforehand that a disapprobation of his theories
must be unfounded because his critics are imbued by passion and party
bias. He is bound to reply to every censure without any regard to
its underlying motives or its background. It is no less impermissible
to keep silent in the face of the often asserted opinion that the theorems
of economics are valid only under hypothetical assumptions never
realized in life and that they are therefore useless for the mental grasp
of reality. It is strange that some schools seem to approve of this
opinion and nonetheless quietly proceed to draw their curves and to
formulate their equations. They do not bother about the meaning of
their reasoning and about its reference to the world of real life and
action.
This is, of course, an untenable attitude. The first task of every
. .sc:ent:f c i x y i y Is the description and defiiiitioii of a!!
conditions and assumptions under which its various statements claim
validity. It is a mistake to set up physics as a model and pattern for
economic research. But those committed to this fallacy should have
learned one thing at least: that no physicist ever believed that the
clarification of some of the assumptions and conditions of physical
theorems is outside the scope of physical research. The main question
that economics is bound to answer is what the relation of its state-
ments is to the reality of human action whose mental grasp is the
objective of economic studies.
Introduction 7
It therefore devolves upon economics to deal thoroughly with the
assertion that its teachings are valid only for the capitalist system of
the shortlived and already vanished liberal period of Western civiliza-
tion, I t is incumbent upon no branch of learning other than economics
to examine all the objections raised from various points of view against
the usefulness of the statements of economic theory for the elucida-
tion of the problems of human action. The system of economic
thought must be built up in such a way that it is proof against any
criticism on the part of irrationalism, historicism, panphysicalism,
behaviorism, and all varieties of polylogism. It is an intolerable state
of affairs that while new arguments are daily advanced to demon-
strate the absurdity and futility of the endeavors of economics, the
economists pretend to ignore all this.
It is no longer enough to deal with the economic problems within
the traditional framework. It is necessary t o build the theory of
cataIlactics upon the soiid foundation of a general theory of human
action, praxeology. This procedure will not only secure it against
many fallacious criticisms but clarify many problems hitherto not
even adequately seen, still less satisfactorily solved. There is, espe-
cially, the fundamental problem of economic calculation.
3 . Economic Theory and the Practice of Human Action
It is customary for many people to blame economics for being
backward. Now it is quite obvious that our economic theory is not
perfect. There is no such thing as perfection in human knowledge, nor
for that matter in any other human achievement. Omniscience is
denied to man. The most elaborate theory that seems to satisfy com-
pletely our thirst for knowledge may one day be amended or sup-
$anted by a new theory. Science does not give us absolute and
final certainty. I t only gives us assurance within the limits of our
mental abilities and the prevailing state of scientific thought. A scien-
tific system is but one station in an endlessly progressing search for
knowledge. It is necessarily affected by the insufficiency inherent in
every human effort. But to acknowledge these facts does not mean
that present-day economics is backward. It merely means that eco-
nomics is a living thing-and to live implies both imperfection and
change.
The reproach of an alleged backwardness is raised against economics
from two different points of view.
There are on the one hand some naturalists and physicists who
censure economics for not being a natural science and not applying the
8 Human Action
methods and procedures of the laboratory. It is one of the tasks of
this treatise to explode the fallacy of such ideas. In these introductory
remarks it may be enough to say a few words about their psycho-
logical background. It is common with narrow-minded people to
reflect upon every respect in which other people differ from them-
selves. The camel in the fable takes exception to all other animals for
not having a hump, and the Ruritanian criticizes the Laputanian for
not being a Ruritanian. The research worker in the laboratory con-
siders it as the sole worthy home of inquiry, and differential equations
as the only sound method of expressing the results of scientific
thought. H e is simply incapable of seeing the epistemological problems
of human action. For him economics cannot be anything but a form
of mechanics.
Then there are people who assert that something must be wrong
with the social sciences because social conditions are unsatisfactory.
The natural sciences have achieved amazing results in the last two
or three hundred years, and the practical utilization of these results
has succeeded in improving the general standard of living to an un-
precedented extent. But, say these critics, the socia1 sciences have
utterly failed in the task of rendering social conditions more satis-
factory. They have not stamped out misery and starvation, economic
crises and unemployment, war and tyranny. They are sterile and have
contributed nothing to the promotion of happiness and human wel-
fare.
These grumblers do not realize that the tremendous progress of
technological methods of production and the resulting increase in
wealth and welfare were feasible only through the pursuit of those
liberal policies which were the practical application of the teachings
of economics. I t was the ideas of the classical economists that removed
the checks imposed by age-old laws, customs, and prejudices upon
technological improvement and freed the genius of reformers and
innovators from the straitjackets of the guilds, government tutelage,
and sociai pressure of various kinds. It was they that reduced the
prestige of conquerors and expropriators and demonstrated the social
benefits derived from business activity. None of the great modern
inventions would have been put to use if the mentality of the pre-
capitalistic era had not been thoroughly demolished by the economists.
What is commonly called the "industrial revolution" was an offspring
of the ideological revolution brought about by the doctrines of the
economists. The economists exploded the old tenets: that it is unfair
and unjust to outdo a competitor by producing better and cheaper
goods; that it is iniquitous to deviate from the traditional methods
of production; that machines are an evil because they bring about
unemployment; that it is one of the tasks of civil government to
prevent efficient businessmen from getting rich and to protect the
less efficient against the competition of the more efficient; that to
restrict the freedom of entrepreneurs by government compulsion or
by coercion on the part of other social powers is an appropriate means
to promote a nation's well-being. British political economy and French
Physiocracy were the pacemakers of modern capitalism. It is they
that made possible the progress of the natural sciences that has heaped
l~enefitsupon the masses.
What is wrong with our age is precisely the widespread ignorance
of the role which these policies of economic freedom played in the
technical evolution of the last two hundred years. People fell prey
to the fallacy that the improvement of the methods of production
was contemporaneous with the policy of laissez faire only by acci-
dent. Deluded by Marxian myths, they consider modern industrial-
ism an outcome of the operation of mysterious L L p r o d ~ c t i ~ eforces"
that do not depend in any tvalr on ideological factors. Classical eco-
nomics, they believe, was not-a factor in the rise of capitalism, but
rather its product, its "ideological superstructure," i.e., a doctrine
designed to defend the unfair claims of the capitalist exploiters. Hence
the abolition of capitalism and the substitution of socialist totalitarian-
ism for a market economy and free enterprise would not impair the
further progress of technology. It would, on the contrary, promote
technological improvement by removing the obstacles which the
selfish interests of the capitalists place in its way.
The characteristic feature of this age of destructive wars and social
disintegration is the revolt against economics. Thomas Carlyle branded
economics a "dismal science," and Karl Marx stigmatized the econ-
omists as "the sycophants of the bourgeoisie." Quacks-praising their
patent medicines and short cuts to the earthly paradise-take pleasure
in scorning economics as "orthodox" and "reactionary." Demagogues
pride themselves on what they call their victories over economics.
The "practical" man boasts of his contempt for economics and his
ignorance of the teachings of "armchair" economists. The economic
policies of the last decades have been the outcome of a mentality
that scoffs at any variety of sound economic theory and glorifies the
spurious doctrines of its detractors. What is called "orthodox" eco-
nomics is in most countries barred from the universities and is
virtually unknown to the leading statesmen, politicians, and writers.
10 Hzmzan Action
The blame for the unsatisfactory state of economic affairs can cer-
tainly not be placed upon a science which both rulers and masses
despise and ignore.
It must be emphasized that the destiny of modern civilization as
developed by the white peoples in the last two hundred years is in-
separably linked with the fate of economic science. This civilization
was able to spring into existence because the peoples were dominated
by ideas which were the application of the teachings of economics to
the problems of economic policy. It will and must perish if the
nations continue to pursue the course which they entered upon under
the spell of doctrines rejecting economic thinking.
It is true that economics is a theoretical science and as such abstains
from any judgment of valuc. It is not its task to tell pcople what ends
they should aim at. It is a science of the means to be applied for the
attainment of ends chosen, not, to be sure, a science of the choosing
of ends. Ultimate decisions, the valuations and the choosing of ends,
are beyond the scopc of any science. Science never tells a man how
he should act; it merely shows how a man must act if he wants to at-
tain definite ends.
It seems to many people that this is very little indeed and that a
scicnce limited to thc investigation of the is and unable to express
a judgment of value about the highest and ultimate ends is of no im-
portance for life and action. This too is a mistake. However, the ex-
posure of this mistake is not a task of thcse introductory remarks. I t
is one of the ends of the treatise itself.
It was necessary to make these preliminary remarks in order to
cxplain why this treatise places economic problems within the broad
frame of a general theory of human action. At the present stage both
of economic thinking and of political discussions concerning the
fundamental issues of social organization, it is no longer feasible to
isolate the treatment of catallactic problems proper. These problems
are only a segmcnt of a general science of human action and must be
dealt with as such