There was once a man in the land of Uz whose name was Job. That man was blame- less and upright, one who feared God and turned away from evil. 2 There were born to him seven sons and three daughters. 3 He had seven thousand sheep, three thousand camels, five hundred yoke of oxen, five hundred donkeys, and very many servants; so that this man was the greatest of all the people of the east. 4 His sons used to go and hold feasts in one another’s houses in turn; and they would send and invite their three sisters to eat and drink with them. 5 And when the feast days had run their course, Job would send and sanctify them, and he would rise early in the morning and offer burnt offerings according to the number of them all; for Job said, “It may be that my children have sinned, and cursed God in their hearts.” This is what Job always did. 6 One day the heavenly beingsa came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satanb also came among them. 7 The Lord said to Satan,b “Where have you come from?” Satanb answered the Lord, “From going to and fro on the earth, and from walking up and down on it.” 8 The Lord said to Satan,b “Have you considered my servant Job? There is no one like him on the earth, a blameless and upright man who fears God and turns away from evil.” 9 Then Satanb answered the Lord, “Does Job fear God for nothing? 10 Have you not put a fence around him and his house and all that he has, on every side? You have blessed the work of his hands, and his possessions have increased in the land. 11 But stretch out your hand now, and touch all that he has, and he will curse you to your face.” 12 The Lord said to Satan,b “Very well, all that he has is in your power; only do not stretch out your hand against him!” So Satanb went out from the presence of the Lord. 13 One day when his sons and daughters were eating and drinking wine in the eldest brother’s house, 14 a messenger came to Job and said, “The oxen were plowing and the donkeys were feeding beside them, 15 and the Sabeans fell on them and carried them off, and killed the servants with the edge of the sword; I alone have escaped to tell you.” 16 While he was still speaking, another came and said, “The fire of God fell from heaven and burned up the sheep and the servants, and consumed them; I alone have escaped to tell you.” 17 While he was still speaking, another came and said, “The Chaldeans formed three columns, made a raid on the camels and carried them off, and killed the servants with the edge of the sword; I alone have escaped to tell you.” 18 While he was still speaking, another came and said, “Your sons and daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother’s house, 19 and suddenly a great wind came across the desert, struck the four corners of the house, and it fell on the young people, and they are dead; I alone have escaped to tell you.” 20 Then Job arose, tore his robe, shaved his head, and fell on the ground and worshiped. 21 He said, “Naked I came from my mother’s womb, and naked shall I return there; the a Heb sons of God b Or the Accuser; Heb ha-satan 1 1–2 13: Prologue The prose prologue contains five scenes, artistically arranged: the first, third, and fifth scenes (1.1–5,13–22; 2.7–13) take place on earth, the second and fourth (1.6–12; 2.1–6) in heaven. All the earthly characters, including Job, remain ignorant throughout the book of what takes place on the heavenly plane. 1 1–5: The naïve language, in the style of a folktale, evokes a distant past. The land of Uz is Edom, southeast of Israel (cf. Jer 25.20; Lam 4.21). Job is not an Israelite; but he is a worshiper of the true God, although he, along with his friends, calls him “El,” “Eloah,” and “Elohim” (all meaning “God”), and “Shadday” (“the Almighty”), not “Yahweh” (“the Lord”). 2: Seven sons, a perfect number. 4: Hold feasts . . . in turn, lit. “each on his day,” presumably on birthdays. 5: Cursed, the Heb text has the word “blessed” here, apparently as a euphemism or pious scribal correction (so also in 1.11; 2.5, 9; see also 1 Kings 21.13). 6–12: The gathering of the divine council in heaven (cf. 1 Kings 22.19–22; Ps 82.1) includes “the Satan,” i.e., “the adversary” of Job and other humans (cf. Zech 3.1), not of God; he is not the “devil” of later Jewish and Christian literature (see textual note b). Here he acts as God’s eyes and ears on earth. He questions whether Job’s righteousness is for its own sake or for the sake of its reward. 13–22: Four messengers announce four disasters, from all directions: Sabeans come from the south (Sheba), Chaldeans from the north, the lightning (fire of God) from the west, with storms sweeping in from the Mediter- ranean, the great wind from the eastern desert. 21: Job praises the Lord for both good and evil, proving God’s heBrew BiBle | 737 joB 3 Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord.” 22 In all this Job did not sin or charge God with wrongdoing. 2 One day the heavenly beingsa came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satanb also came among them to present himself before the Lord. 2 The Lord said to Satan,b “Where have you come from?” Satanc answered the Lord, “From going to and fro on the earth, and from walking up and down on it.” 3 The Lord said to Satan,b “Have you considered my servant Job? There is no one like him on the earth, a blameless and upright man who fears God and turns away from evil. He still persists in his integrity, although you incited me against him, to destroy him for no reason.” 4 Then Satanb answered the Lord, “Skin for skin! All that people have they will give to save their lives.d 5 But stretch out your hand now and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will curse you to your face.” 6 The Lord said to Satan,b “Very well, he is in your power; only spare his life.” 7 So Satanb went out from the presence of the Lord, and inflicted loathsome sores on Job from the sole of his foot to the crown of his head. 8 Jobe took a potsherd with which to scrape himself, and sat among the ashes. 9 Then his wife said to him, “Do you still persist in your integrity? Cursef God, and die.” 10 But he said to her, “You speak as any foolish woman would speak. Shall we receive the good at the hand of God, and not receive the bad?” In all this Job did not sin with his lips. 11 Now when Job’s three friends heard of all these troubles that had come upon him, each of them set out from his home—Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite. They met together to go and console and comfort him. 12 When they saw him from a distance, they did not recognize him, and they raised their voices and wept aloud; they tore their robes and threw dust in the air upon their heads. 13 They sat with him on the ground seven days and seven nights, and no one spoke a word to him, for they saw that his suffering was very great. 3 After this Job opened his mouth and cursed the day of his birth. 2 Job said: a Heb sons of God b Or the Accuser; Heb ha-satan c Or The Accuser; Heb ha-satan d Or All that the man has he will give for his life e Heb He f Heb Bless confidence in him justified. The mother’s womb to which Job will return is that of mother earth (cf. Gen 3.19). 2 1–6: Now again in the heavenly council, the Lord remarks that Job still persists in his integrity, i.e., continues blameless as ever. 4: Skin for skin! Job has saved his own skin by piously accepting the death of his children; if God now attacks Job himself, Job will attack God, by cursing him (see 1.5n.). 7–13: The fourth scene dissolves into the fifth: God authorizes the suffering, and immediately the Satan afflicts Job. 7: Loathsome sores, some unspecified skin disease (cf. 7.5; 30.30). 8: To express his sense of desolation and isolation, Job removes himself from society and sits on the rubbish heap outside his city, performing rituals of mourning (cf. Ezek 27.30; Jon 3.6). He uses broken pieces of pottery he finds there to scratch himself to relieve the itchiness. 9: The outcome of all Job’s piety has been to rob his wife of her ten children, her social standing, and her livelihood. When she urges him to curse God (see 1.5n.), and so bring his misery to an end with death, he mildly replies that she is speaking like any foolish woman, i.e., low-class, irreligious women, abandoning their family’s standards of for- mal and proper behavior. Job did not sin with his lips, it is not implied that he sinned in what he thought. Job has disproved the Satan’s claim that Job would sin with his lips by cursing God. 11–13: Job, being a chieftain of great importance (1.3), has other high-ranking friends. These three, all apparently from other towns in Edom, have kindly intentions toward him, but when they see how badly he is suffering they do not offer him any consola- tion, but treat him as if he were already dead, throwing dust . . . upon their heads, a mourning ritual (see Josh 7.6; Lam 2.10), and silently mourning him seven days and seven nights (see Gen 50.10; Sir 22.12). 3 1–42 6: The dialogues 3 1–11 20: First cycle of speeches 3 1–26: Job’s first speech After the grandeur and deliberateness of the prologue (chs 1–2), the reader is suddenly plunged into the dramatic turmoil of the poem (3.1–42.6); the external description of suffering gives way to Job’s inner experience. Its three strophes express a wish he had never been born (vv. 3–10); failing that, 738 | heBrew BiBle joB 3 3 “Let the day perish in which I was born, and the night that said, ‘A man-child is conceived.’ 4 Let that day be darkness! May God above not seek it, or light shine on it. 5 Let gloom and deep darkness claim it. Let clouds settle upon it; let the blackness of the day terrify it. 6 That night—let thick darkness seize it! let it not rejoice among the days of the year; let it not come into the number of the months. 7 Yes, let that night be barren; let no joyful cry be hearda in it. 8 Let those curse it who curse the Sea,b those who are skilled to rouse up Leviathan. 9 Let the stars of its dawn be dark; let it hope for light, but have none; may it not see the eyelids of the morning— 10 because it did not shut the doors of my mother’s womb, and hide trouble from my eyes. 11 “Why did I not die at birth, come forth from the womb and expire? 12 Why were there knees to receive me, or breasts for me to suck? 13 Now I would be lying down and quiet; I would be asleep; then I would be at rest 14 with kings and counselors of the earth who rebuild ruins for themselves, 15 or with princes who have gold, who fill their houses with silver. 16 Or why was I not buried like a stillborn child, like an infant that never sees the light? 17 There the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary are at rest. 18 There the prisoners are at ease together; they do not hear the voice of the taskmaster. 19 The small and the great are there, and the slaves are free from their masters. 20 “Why is light given to one in misery, and life to the bitter in soul, 21 who long for death, but it does not come, and dig for it more than for hidden treasures; 22 who rejoice exceedingly, and are glad when they find the grave? 23 Why is light given to one who cannot see the way, whom God has fenced in? 24 For my sighing comes likec my bread, and my groanings are poured out like water. 25 Truly the thing that I fear comes upon me, and what I dread befalls me. a Heb come b Cn: Heb day c Heb before a wish he had died at birth (vv. 11–19); failing that, a wish that he, and people suffering as he does, could simply die when they are ready (vv. 20–26). 3–10: A curse naturally concerns the future, and a curse on the day of his birth (cf. Jer 20.14–18) is a futile curse, for the past cannot be changed. Job wishes that the day of his birth and conception (viewed poetically as one event) could have been blacked out (vv. 4–6a) so that it would not have entered into the calendar of the year (vv. 6b,c); he wishes that the sorcerers who put a curse on days could have made it one of the unlucky days, in which it would have been impossible for his parents to have conceived him or for his mother to have given birth to him (vv. 8a,10a). 8: Some ancient magicians obviously believed they could rouse up Leviathan, the sea-monster (cf. Ps 104.26; Isa 27.1) and dragon of chaos (see 7.12; Ps 74.13–14), who would perhaps swallow up the sun, so causing the darkness of eclipse. 11–19: If he had to be born, why could he not have died at birth (v. 11a) or, at least, have been stillborn (v. 16)? Death has for him now become sweeter than life, and he compares the quiet peacefulness of the underworld (Sheol; cf. Eccl 6.3–5; Sir 30.3) to his present troubled and anxious lot (vv. 13–19). 14 Near Eastern kings frequently boasted that they had rebuilt famous ruined cities. 20–26: Now Job not only asks why he himself has to go on living, but why people in gen- eral cannot simply die when they want to (vv. 20–23). 23: Previously, God’s hedge of protection about his life (cf. 1.10) had ensured his well-being; but now that he wants to die, God’s preservation of his life seems an artificia