1   The Opening   al-Fatihah 
1  In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful. 
2  Praise be to God, Lord of the Worlds. 
3  The Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. 
4  Master of the Day of Judgment. 
5  It is You we worship, and upon You we call for help. 
6  Guide us to the straight path. 
7  The path of those You have blessed, not of those against whom 
there is anger, nor of those who are misguided.
 
2   The Heifer   al-Baqarah 
In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful. 
1  Alif, Lam, Meem. 
2  This is the Book in which there is no doubt, a guide for the 
righteous. 
3  Those who believe in the unseen, and perform the prayers, and 
give from what We have provided for them. 
4  And those who believe in what was revealed to you, and in what 
was revealed before you, and are certain of the Hereafter. 
5  These are upon guidance from their Lord. These are the 
successful. 
6  As for those who disbelieve-it is the same for them, whether you 
have warned them, or have not warned them-they do not believe. 
7  God has set a seal on their hearts and on their hearing, and over 
their vision is a veil. They will have a severe torment. 
8  Among the people are those who say, "We believe in God and in 
the Last Day," but they are not believers. 
page 1 
The Heifer  2  al-Baqarah 
9  They seek to deceive God and those who believe, but they deceive 
none but themselves, though they are not aware. 
10  In their hearts is sickness, and God has increased their sickness. 
They will have a painful punishment because of their denial. 
11  And when it is said to them, "Do not make trouble on earth," they 
say, "We are only reformers." 
12  In fact, they are the troublemakers, but they are not aware. 
13  And when it is said to them, "Believe as the people have 
believed," they say, "Shall we believe as the fools have believed?" In 
fact, it is they who are the fools, but they do not know. 
14  And when they come across those who believe, they say, "We 
believe"; but when they are alone with their devils, they say, "We are 
with you; we were only ridiculing." 
15  It is God who ridicules them, and leaves them bewildered in their 
transgression. 
16  Those are they who have bartered error for guidance; but their 
trade does not profit them, and they are not guided. 
17  Their likeness is that of a person who kindled a fire; when it 
illuminated all around him, God took away their light, and left them 

in darkness, unable to see.  
18  Deaf, dumb, blind. They will not return. 
19  Or like a cloudburst from the sky, in which is darkness, and 
thunder, and lightning. They press their fingers into their ears from 

the thunderbolts, in fear of death. But God surrounds the 

disbelievers. 
20  The lightning almost snatches their sight away. Whenever it 
illuminates for them, they walk in it; but when it grows dark over 
them, they stand still. Had God willed, He could have taken away 

their hearing and their sight. God is capable of everything. 
page 2 
The Heifer  2  al-Baqarah 
21  O people! Worship your Lord who created you and those before 
you, that you may attain piety. 
22  He who made the earth a habitat for you, and the sky a structure, 
and sends water down from the sky, and brings out fruits thereby, 
as a sustenance for you. Therefore, do not assign rivals to God while 

you know. 
23  And if you are in doubt about what We have revealed to Our 
servant, then produce a chapter like these, and call your witnesses 

apart from God, if you are truthful. 
24  But if you do not-and you will not-then beware the Fire whose 
fuel is people and stones, prepared for the disbelievers. 
25  And give good news to those who believe and do righteous 
deeds; that they will have gardens beneath which rivers flow. 

Whenever they are provided with fruit therefrom as sustenance, 
they will say, "This is what we were provided with before," and they 
will be given the like of it. And they will have pure spouses therein, 
and they will abide therein forever. 
26  God does not shy away from making an example of a gnat, or 
something above it. As for those who believe, they know that it is 

the Truth from their Lord. But as for those who disbelieve, they say, 
"What did God intend by this example?" He leads astray many 
thereby, and He guides many thereby; but He misleads thereby only 

the evildoers. 
27  Those who violate God's covenant after its confirmation, and 
sever what God has commanded to be joined, and commit evil on 
earth. These are the losers.  
28  How can you deny God, when you were dead and He gave you 
life, then He will put you to death, then He will bring you to life, then 
to Him you will be returned?  
page 3 
The Heifer  2  al-Baqarah 
29  It is He who created for you everything on earth, then turned to 
the heaven, and made them seven heavens. And He is aware of all 
things. 
30  When your Lord said to the angels, "I am placing a successor on 
earth." They said, "Will You place in it someone who will cause 
corruption in it and shed blood, while we declare Your praises and 

sanctify You?" He said, "I know what you do not know." 
31  And He taught Adam the names, all of them; then he presented 
them to the angels, and said, "Tell Me the names of these, if you are 
sincere." 
32  They said, "Glory be to You! We have no knowledge except what 
You have taught us. It is you who are the Knowledgeable, the Wise." 
33  He said, "O Adam, tell them their names." And when he told them 
their names, He said, "Did I not tell you that I know the secrets of 
the heavens and the earth, and that I know what you reveal and 
what you conceal?" 
34  And We said to the angels, "Bow down to Adam." They bowed 
down, except for Satan. He refused, was arrogant, and was one of 
the disbelievers. 
35  We said, "O Adam, inhabit the Garden, you and your spouse, and 
eat from it freely as you please, but do not approach this tree, lest 

you become wrongdoers." 
36  But Satan caused them to slip from it, and caused them to depart 
the state they were in. We said, "Go down, some of you enemies of 

one another. And you will have residence on earth, and enjoyment 
for a while." 
37  Then Adam received words from his Lord, so He relented 
towards him. He is the Relenting, the Merciful.  
38  We said, "Go down from it, all of you. Yet whenever guidance 
comes to you from Me, then whoever follows My guidance-they 
have nothing to fear, nor shall they grieve. 
page 4 
The Heifer  2  al-Baqarah 
39  But as for those who disbelieve and reject Our signs-these are 
the inmates of the Fire-wherein they will remain forever." 
40  O Children of Israel! Remember My blessings which I bestowed 
upon you, and fulfill your pledge to Me, and I will fulfill My pledge to 
you, and fear Me. 
41  And believe in what I revealed, confirming what is with you; and 
do not be the first to deny it; and do not exchange My revelations 

for a small price; and be conscious of Me. 
42  And do not mix truth with falsehood, and do not conceal the 
truth while you know. 
43  And attend to your prayers, and practice regular charity, and 
kneel with those who kneel. 
44  Do you command people to virtuous conduct, and forget 
yourselves, even though you read the Scripture? Do you not 
understand? 
45  And seek help through patience and prayer. But it is difficult, 
except for the devout. 
46  Those who know that they will meet their Lord, and that to Him 
they will return. 
47  O Children of Israel! Remember My favor which I bestowed upon 
you, and I that favored you over all nations. 
48  And beware of a Day when no soul will avail another in the least, 
nor will any intercession be accepted on its behalf, nor will any 
ransom be taken from it, nor will they be helped. 
49  And recall that We delivered you from the people of Pharaoh. 
They inflicted on you terrible persecution, killing your sons and 
sparing your women. Therein was a tremendous trial from your 

Lord. 
50  And recall that We parted the sea for you, so We saved you, and 
We drowned the people of Pharaoh as you looked on.